# L'officiel Story

*04/20/2017*

Have you heard about a town called Mardin? It’s a middle eastern town in Turkey - Syria border, one of the UNESCO World Heritages. Imagine an ancient town where people still live in and pray in 800 years old mosque standing next 1500 years old church. Add that a 4500 years old Yazidi temple, still protected as original, under the basement of a church. If you like history and ancient cultures, Mardin is your Disneyland. If not, here is a love story about it.

I met Nova in Mardin two years ago, a foggy winter day in Mardin. She was shooting photos of the door of the Zinciriya Madrasa, wearing loose gray pants that had a mix of brown and green dirt on the back, and a loose blue rain jacket, a red kofiya and a hat. We were alone in the same madrasa, and I was also shooting photos with my camera, wearing a red kofiya & hat.  Our first dialog was;

Me - Is the door open?
Nova - No.

She was coming from Urfa, where I volunteered in a refugee camp and where she slept in the bus station. She was traveling all around Turkey, and her next stop was another ancient town called Hasankeyf, where I was also going to shoot a video. 

Our first date happened to be having coffee during a sunset in Hasankeyf. She was an Interior Designer who left her job to travel the world by hitchhiking. She spent a month in India, two months in Nepal, another month in Jordan and finally came to Turkey. I was very impressed from her power of choosing a route around the planet and executing that plan step by step.

Beginning from the moment we met until I proposed her to marry me, we spent every single minute together. Because the towns were close to war and considered as dangerous, there was no strangers except us. What I mean is; we had no distractions at all, so we could completely focus on eachother. We walked in all these cities, talked about current, past and future. I liked her mind a lot. Everything I heard from her was new to my mind, and it opened up a new window in my life. A window to true freedom. 

8 Months after, I was kissing Nova in our wedding ceremony in Bali. What happened in that 8 months? I’ll keep it short; Nova and I had our first kiss, and I proposed her to marry me. She cancelled her world trip and went back to Indonesia, I went back to California and broke my both feet by falling down from a big rock, had a surgery, spent three months on wellchair, 2 months on crutches, visited Nova’s family meanwhile I wasn’t able to walk, Nova’s family visited my family, and my family came to Bali to attend the wedding. 

This is where the second chapter of our relationship begins; living together, just like married couples usually do. Our home was in Oakland, California. On the weekdays, I was going to my day job and try to make my unhappy manager happy, on the weekends, I was taking Nova to weekend trips. Don’t get me wrong, I’m not a rich guy who can afford going weekend trips every weekend. We were simply sleeping in the car and eating what we brought from home to afford traveling on weekends. 

Our first trip was to Big Sur in California. It’s a scenic road near rocky cliffs and breathtaking dark blue ocean. You can’t swim here but would really enjoy just the view of it. The nature is protected so well that you’d never see any piece of thrash or plastic around. After leaving my job on a friday evening, Nova and I started driving to Big Sur. It’s about 4 hours drive, so we made it there about midnight, parked in a viewpoint and went to sleep in the car. At about 3am, we woke up with police flashlights in our faces. One of the officers asked me;

- You kids tired?
- Yes, sir.

I completely agree with you, dear reader, you would not want to imagine waking up from your sleep and being called “kids” in your first trip after marriage, but believe me, a little experience with police can add some spice to the romance in your relationship.

The world became our playground on the weekends. We’d leave the city every friday evening celebrating being on the road with loud music, car-camp somewhere with our Subaru Outback 2004, brush our tooth under the moonlight and stars, wake up with either police flaslight or sunrise. On the day time we’d hike around, shoot a lot of photos, cook Indomie noodles with eggs, watch a new Fargo episode and sleep in the car. From Joshua Tree to Arctic Circle in Alaska where we’d wake up and see aural lights playing in the sky, this is how we traveled. After filling months with this sort of weekend trips, we got really good at how we do it, like how to share the work, how to organize the food, how to stay clean, how to make fire/boil water when the weather is bad, how to stay warm when the temperature goes below -20… 

You might assume these skills will be useful only when you’re in the nature. In fact, practicing this way of travel changed our mindsets. During the weekdays when I’m at work, Nova was working on her own photography business. She was doing photoshoot for interior designers, opening exhibitions in art shows or indoor climbing gyms… One weekend, instead of leaving the town, we decided to try selling some photography prints on the street. We found a table, framed some good quality prints of Nova’s photography and opened our stall in the Farmer’s Market (an actual open market for farmers - not the supermarket one) in Oakland. It went quite well from the business perspective, but add that what we learnt. We learnt how to sell things on the street, how would a potential buyer walk on the street, how to deal with stormy weather, how to find the right market to make good sales, how to deal with crazy people spitting on your products… 

A thousand years ago, Persian mathematician Omar Khayyam said “No matter how hard for you to learn / Time will teach you eventually” in one of his poems on time, how true it is. A lot of people can see marriage as a way to lose freedom but in fact, we don’t even know how to be free. The time will teach us how to do become one depending how much risks we can take it for, and it won’t stop teaching until the last day of our life.

Last year on April, we were sensing a powerful magnetic drift that could move our future to a different path with new experiences, new goals, new challenges and new habits. We would either ignore this change and stick to our past goals such as getting green card to stay in US, or we would welcome this drift and follow the path to the new future. One evening, Nova and I opened a notebook and started writing the advantages and disadvantages of staying in US, working and getting green card. The advantages were comfort, security and other materialistic values. The disadvantages were a long list, mostly related to freedom. The next day, I let my boss about cancelling our greencard application and my last day at work. People at work were surprised, they thought it’s a bad decision I’ll regret;

- Azer, are you sure?
- Yes!
- Why don’t you think until next week?
- No, we made the decision.

We sold everything we had, the car we drove over 50.000 kilometers, bicycles, books, clothes, TV, sofa, bed frames, all that shit. At the end, two backpacks were left. We were ready to leave US and never come back again.

Our first destination was Indonesia. We hitchhiked from Java to Flores island by hopping on commercial trucks that crosses to the next island on a boat. Before Flores, we passed through Bali, Lombok, Sumbawa islands. We did enjoy seeing breathtaking islands in Flores, swimming under the stars in Amed, snorkeling in the Pink Beach with color underwater world with sea turtles, but the best part of this trip was the people in the country side of Indonesia. In some places, your experience is limited by the tourism. That’s why you gotta leave that bubble and find the locals who don’t expect you to be there. This is the beauty of hitchhiking, you don’t know who will take you to their car and where you’ll get off. We found ourselves in the middle of nowhere a lot of times, walked a lot, got sick and slept for hours in a stranger’s house, instead of money, we shared laughters, danced with villagers, joined Hindu ceremonies, played football with kids on the empty roads where we desperately waited a ride for hours. 

After Indonesia, our next destination was Morocco. If you ask me to describe my experience there, I’d call it “time travel”. It reminded me little bit of Cuba, where the aritmetic definition time wouldn’t match what you’d experience. The peak of this feeling filled my body when I woke up in the middle of a date market in Maadid. We were in a truck ride for last 12 hours and the driver we later became good friends, Othmane, wanted to park in the middle of the date market and buy some dates for his family.

After Maadid, we arrived Merzouga, the last village in the middle of Eastern Sahare Desert. We packed some water, bread and nutella in our backpacks and walked directly to the desert, and kept walking until we are deep enough in the desert to not see any lights coming out of the Berberi camps or camel poops around us. We slept under the stars and the bright full moon without using a tent, watched the second season of Narcos right there, in the middle of Eastern Sahara, before going to sleep. Netflix and chill, fuck yeah.

There is one reality beyond all these details though. Watching the wind creating hills from the yellow sand, how sun goes down on one side, how moon shows up on the other side, made me realize that there is a true artist behind this masterpiece, filling our eyes with a breathtakingly minimalistic view and a gentle kiss of the winds to our body…

Our journey continued with hitchhiking to the ancient chaos of the medinas of Marrakech and Fez, stopping by at Aït Benhadou, a  madina built deffensively as castle. We hiked to the Toubkal Mountain Summit where we tasted the fear of death with some local young hikers after getting caught by a storm strong enough to beat down 4 people to the ground, walked 12 hours with 20kg weight backpacks until the nearest village where we could hide from the storm. 

A hitchhiker from Slovenia joined us, Ziga. Waiting hours for ride in the big beautiful landscape of Morocco got easier thanks to him, asking me to play harmonica so he could sing Bosnian songs and make us dance. We kept going until Legzira, famous for rock arches in the beaches. Couple of minutes before we leave Legzira, I said “hi” to a local filling bucket with ocean water.

Abella Dorado, a young student who built his own cave in Legzira and lives alone. He invited us to have tea, then we started singing under the sky full of stars, lighted up a sky lantern and, watched how moon goes down above the ocean and had a smooth sleep in the Abella’s cave.

From mediterranean coast in the north to all the way to the southern border, where the white sands of the Western Sahara meets blue ocean, it took us 2.5 months to hitchhike Morocco. In the end of these three months, my Whatsapp was full of messages from the truck drivers we met on the road. We met a lot of truck drivers. Sometimes they took us to their home to meet their family and have dinner together, sometimes we waited until they unload their weight so we can have lunch together, sometimes we cried together when we watched a video I shot during my volunteer in Turkey - Syria border. Humanity is one, and it’s quite beautiful.

Although our original plan was to move to Kenya after Morocco, we got an invitation to join a farming conference in Jordan and I had great hopes about it. We accepted the invitation, spent last week in Morocco studying farming and economy, preparing for the speech I’ll do. First two days in Jordan was all about a conference where middle eastern academicians meet and tell their ideas about how to build efficient solutions to the farming. Nova and I talked about our distribution idea in the event, and we do hope to make  our idea reality soon.

After the event, we had three weeks left to explore Jordan. As Nova already traveld Jordan two years ago, she knew where to stay, where to eat and where to see. We hitchhiked from Amman to the south, Wadi Rum, spent a night in the tea shop, woke up at 5am and watched sunrise from a hill. The whole landscape looked like Mars, literally. After Wadi Rum, we hitchhiked to Petra, took the secret path that takes 2 hours (one way) hike but you got to see Petra from top. Dead Sea came after that, meanwhile we were swimming in the water salty enough to make you float easily, a group of Palestinians were dancing with music near the water.

We had a lot of tea in Jordan. I met a shepherd near the little Petra, Attila, he took us to have tea in his tent. Then we were hanging out in a nearby village and a woman saw me, and invited us to have tea in her house, too. We spent two days with her family, drinking countless cups of tea, and having a big tray of famous makluba dish. We were not speaking same language but we had strong connection with this family, we did shot a portrait of them and got it printed & framed, gave them as a gift. 

Turkey was our next destination, only because it was close to Jordan, and we wanted to spend some time with my friends and family. This is where the third chapter in our relationship begins; I call it “the void”. We left US and got back to Turkey, so, what are we doing next ? Every single time someone asked me this question, I felt like I never thought about how to answer it before. Sometimes I tried to come up with some answers because all our friends and family members were asking it, but the answer I come up with would sound absurd to my very own ears right after I phrase it. 

This is called falling into void, and it’s the strongest signal from your heart to mind about the missing piece in your current;  the need of change. I believe that life shows you the way when you own it and take risks for it. We put our magic notebook on the table again, wrote down lists of possible cities and countries to settle down, voted them on every aspect we could imagine, like the quality of social life, infastructure, distance to our families, living expenses, etc… And ended up deciding to see how it’s like to live in Ubud, for first. And nowadays, we wake up by the roaster sounds in our little house next to a Hindu temple with strange monkey and tiger sculptures, and work hard on our independent projects. One of them is called Kozmos, you can check it out at getkozmos.com.

After all these big changes in our lives, what we realized is the difficulty of carrying the responsibility of freedom. The physical difficulties that I counted along this article such as carrying 20kg weight on your backpack in a stormy weather for 12 hours, is an easy-cheesy thing to do, compared to figuring out how a free person should spend their life in a responsible way.

Once, we were hungry for freedom and took risks to get rid of all the chains in our feet, initially assumed seeking for the beauty of the humanity and the earth would fill the void in our lifes. It did, but only for a while. Nowadays, we are seeking answers to bigger and harder questions that arised in our minds recently, and we know that they won’t be answered anytime soon.
