# Conscious Business


* Author: Fred Kofman
* GoodReads: [Conscious Business: How to Build Value Through Values](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/1169674.Conscious_Business)

## Highlights

* We then must choose what matters more to each of us—knowing or learning. Real learning opens us to the fear of uncertainty and the embarrassment of incompetence, as well as the vulnerability of needing one another.
* We begin to see day-to-day work as a continual dance of learning with and from one another, where what we achieve rests on the quality of our conversations—because our working together centers on how we talk, relate, and commit to one another and to our aims.
* “If you want to change how a person thinks, give up. You cannot change how another person thinks. Give them a tool the use of which will gradually lead them to think differently.”
* “Nobody’s more blind that the one who doesn’t want to see.”
* Nobody is immune from unconsciousness. The best way to deal with it is not to judge it, but to touch it with compassion and awareness.
* The problem is not that people think differently, the problem is that somebody thinks that he is right, and anybody who does not think like him must be wrong. Thus, the “different ones” become enemies to eliminate.
* Not surprisingly, they don’t want to waste their time engaging with it in dialogue. They simply want to get rid of it by any means and move on.
* “If only it were all so simple! If only there were evil people somewhere, insidiously committing evil deeds, and it were necessary only to separate them from the rest of us and destroy them; but the line dividing good and evil cuts through the heart of every human being. And who is willing to destroy a piece of his own heart?”
* awareness is not a one-time decision. Staying conscious is an ongoing process that demands constant attention and commitment.
* I learned that happiness and fulfillment do not come from pleasure but from meaning, from the pursuit of a noble purpose.
* Leadership is about being more than knowing; about emotion more than cognition; about spirit more than matter.
* What did these leaders learn? First, they learned that freedom, responsibility, and integrity are the keys to success, but that these qualities demand the courage to face existential anxiety.
* I use seven qualities to distinguish conscious from unconscious employees. The first three are character attributes: unconditional responsibility, essential integrity, and ontological humility. The next three are interpersonal skills: authentic communication, constructive negotiation, and impeccable coordination. The seventh quality is an enabling condition for the previous six: emotional mastery.
* Conscious employees take responsibility for their lives. They don’t compromise human values for material success. They speak their truth and listen to others’ truths with honesty and respect. They look for creative solutions to disagreements and honor their commitments impeccably. They are in touch with their emotions and express them productively.
* No matter what type of business, the only way to generate a competitive advantage and long-term profitability is to attract, develop, and retain talented employees.
* “Talented employees need great managers. The talented employee may join a company because of its charismatic leaders, its generous benefits, and its world-class training programs, but how long that employee stays and how productive he is while he is there is determined by his relationship with his immediate supervisor.”
* The worst leader is he who people despise. A good leader is he who people worship. A great leader is he who makes people say: “We ourselves did it.” LAO TZU, TAO TE CHING
* Leadership is the process by which a person sets a purpose for other persons and motivates them to pursue it with effectiveness and full commitment. Leadership transforms individual potential into collective performance. The leader’s job is to develop and maintain a high-performing team. Her effectiveness is demonstrated by the performance of the team.*
* An essential part of the manager’s job is to enlist the full cooperation of those she leads, shifting their motivation from external compliance to internal commitment.
* In other words, she needs to prove that she can perform managerial functions, such as selecting the right people to join the team, assigning tasks appropriately, providing context for how all the tasks fit together in the pursuit of the team goal, and so on.
* A great manager holds not only herself accountable for conscious behavior, but everybody else as well; and she holds everybody else accountable for holding everybody else—including the manager herself—accountable.
* When we look at an organization from the impersonal It perspective, we consider its ability to achieve its goals, pursue its vision, and fulfill its mission in a way that enhances its capacity to continue to do so in the future.
* Stripped of the human dimensions, business appears to be an unconscious activity in which success and failure depend exclusively on the management of mindless things. However, business success essentially depends on the leadership of conscious beings.
* In order to offer their full engagement to the organization, people demand to feel accepted, respected, supported, acknowledged, and challenged. Monetary compensation alone cannot accomplish this. This is why solidarity is so fundamental to long-term business success. If people do not cooperate and respect each other, the organization will fail.
* Our attention is normally drawn to that which we can see (the effect), which obscures the importance of what remains hidden (the cause). We focus on results (the having) and forget the process (the doing) necessary to achieve those results. We are even less aware of the infrastructure (the being) that underlies processes and provides the necessary capabilities for their functioning.
* Culture is best described as the standard beliefs and expectations of “how we do things around here.” Culture develops from the messages that group members receive about how they are expected to behave.
* To change a culture, the leaders have to change the messages people receive about what they must do to fit in.
* In the hands of a mature, healthy human being—one who has achieved full humanness—power ... is a great blessing. But in the hands of the immature, vicious, or emotionally sick, power is a horrible danger. ABRAHAM MASLOW
* Ontological arrogance is the claim that things are the way you see them, that your truth is the only truth. It is the belief that the only valid perspective is the one you hold, and that anybody who sees things differently is mistaken.
* At work we interact in three basic ways. We communicate to understand each other, we negotiate our differences to make decisions, and we coordinate our actions through mutual commitments.
* The challenge of communication is to share difficult information with honesty and respect in a way that honors your values, deepens your relationships, and improves your (and the organization’s) performance. To understand this challenge, consider how you would tell a colleague, in a way that helps both of you work better together, that you think his proposal is a terrible idea.
* Manipulative communication is the choice to withhold relevant information in order to get what you want.
* From a personal perspective, the gap between your real thoughts and your messages sets off a feeling of hypocrisy. Hiding relevant parts of your truth produces stress because it violates your sense of honesty.
* Narcissistic negotiation is the attempt to prove your worth by beating up your opponent.
* Some of us have concluded that it is better to suppress our emotions. Pushing them into a dark corner of our minds, however, defeats our purpose. In the shadows, beyond the reach of awareness, they grow until they become strong enough to mount an assault and take control. If we manage to repel them, they revert to covert tactics, creating stress, anxiety, depression, and other psychosomatic diseases.
* A big, tough samurai once went to see a little monk. “Monk,” he barked, in a voice accustomed to instant obedience, “teach me about heaven and hell!” The monk looked up at the mighty warrior and replied with utter disdain, “Teach you about heaven and hell? I couldn’t teach you about anything. You’re dumb. You’re dirty. You’re a disgrace, an embarrassment to the samurai class. Get out of my sight. I can’t stand you.” The samurai got furious. He shook, red in the face, speechless with rage. He pulled out his sword, and prepared to slay the monk. Looking straight into the samurai’s eyes, the monk said softly, “That’s hell.” The samurai froze, realizing the compassion of the monk who had risked his life to show him hell! He put down his sword and fell to his knees, filled with gratitude. The monk said softly, “And that’s heaven.”
* The basic difference between an ordinary man and a warrior is that a warrior takes everything as a challenge, while an ordinary man takes everything as a blessing or a curse. DON JUAN, YAQUI SHAMAN
* You must take unconditional responsibility; you need to see yourself as a “player,” as a central character who has contributed to shape the current situation—and who can thus affect its future. This is the opposite of seeing yourself as a “victim,” subject to forces beyond your control. The player is in the game and can affect the result. The victim is out of the game and can only suffer the consequences of others’ actions.
* As a human being, you are an autonomous (from the Greek, “self-ruling”) being. And the more conscious you are of your autonomy, the more unconditioned your responses will be.
* Reverend Andre Scheffer was a minister of the Dutch Reformed Mission Church in Africa. He had a dry sense of humor and liked to poke fun at us. “You know,” he would say, “the white man has a more difficult task than the black man in this country. Whenever there is a problem, we (white men) have to find a solution. But whenever you blacks have a problem, you have an excuse. You can simply say, ‘Ingabilungu’ ... a Xhosa expression that means, ‘It is the whites.’” He was saying that we could always blame all of our troubles on the white man. His message was that we must also look within ourselves and become responsible for our actions—sentiments with which I wholeheartedly agreed. NELSON MANDELA
* Freedom distinguishes a human being from every other type of being; being human means being able to choose. Perhaps the most important exercise of this freedom is the decision about whether to live as a victim or a player.
* A conscious leader goes beyond being an example of playerhood. He commits to “lowering the bar” so that others have a smaller challenge to become players. He also commits to “raising the bar” so that others find it impossibly challenging to stay in the organization as victims.
* In his role as cultural architect, the conscious leader (with his conscious leadership team) gives a clear message that, “The way we do things here is the way of the player.” This is a message he communicates consistently through his behavior; symbolic acts such as hiring, promoting, demoting, and firing; and implementation of formal systems such as budgeting, strategic planning, reward and recognition, etc.
* The political discourse of victimhood is appealing, and in the short run can produce great euphoria and a sense of community—just like a drug. The easiest way to bring a group together is to find a common enemy and blame it for the group’s misery. In the long run, however, that strategy destroys the group’s spirit.
* Only when leaders are conscious of the long-term consequences of victimhood are they willing to forgo its immediate but transient benefits. Instead of focusing the group’s grief and anger on a scapegoat, the conscious leader helps the group redirect that energy toward pursuing its goals with integrity.
* True success is not accomplishing your goals, but feeling happy and at peace.
* Beyond success lies the serene joy of integrity. That is why essential integrity is the heart of success beyond success.
* Success is in the future. It is the outcome of a process that takes time and depends on factors beyond our control. Integrity is immediate and unconditional. Every time we act, we are either in alignment with our values or we are not.
* First, integrity implies excellence, so it encourages full dedication to the mission at hand: that is, to win. There is no loss of energy or loss of focus on the task. Second, integrity provides a wider interpretation than success. Whereas success tends to focus on the local subsystem and the short term, integrity focuses on the systemic long-term consequences.
* We do not see things as they are. We see things as we are. THE TALMUD
* Beauty in things exists in the mind which contemplates them. DAVID HUME
* Ontological arrogance is the belief that your perspective is privileged, that yours is the only true way to interpret a situation.
* most of us assume we see things as they are; that is not so. We actually see things as they appear to us.
* Ontological humility is the acknowledgment that you do not have a special claim on reality or truth, that others have equally valid perspectives deserving respect and consideration.
* .[W]hat things are independently of our modes of perception and thought is something of which we cannot form any conception. On the one side we have the world of things as they appear to us—what Kant calls the world of phenomena. This is the world of possible knowledge for us. But all the forms this knowledge takes are subject-dependent. On the other side there is the world of things as they are in themselves, what Kant calls the noumenal world. Its mode of existence has nothing to do with the particular ways in which we register things. But to this realm, for that very reason, we have no means of access. BRYAN MAGEE
* An opinion is toxic when it masquerades as a fact. Because of its sentence structure, a toxic opinion appears as an expression of fact.
* The first condition of an effective opinion is that you own it. You must acknowledge that it is your opinion as opposed to the truth. This creates “space” for the coexistence of multiple perspectives and lowers defensiveness. Instead of asserting, “The plant is inefficient,” you can say, “I believe that the plant is operating inefficiently.” Instead of “You’re wrong,” you can say, “I think that you’re wrong.” Instead of “The meeting is boring,” you can say, “I find the meeting boring.” Instead of “We are wasting time,” say, “It seems to me that we are wasting time.”
* Men are born soft and supple; dead, they are stiff and hard. Plants are both tender and pliant; dead, they are brittle and dry. Thus whoever is stiff and inflexible is a disciple of death. Whoever is soft and yielding is a disciple of life. The hard and stiff will be broken. The soft and supple will prevail. LAO TZU, TAO TE CHING
* We tend to see ourselves primarily in the light of our intentions, which are invisible to others, while we see others mainly in the light of their actions, which are visible to us. J.G. BENNETT
* When criticism meets defensiveness, it turns into contempt. We end up alienated from each other and lose all sense of solidarity. We conclude that it would be useless to discuss things openly, since we are clearly at odds. We suppress our feelings and avoid talking about the relationship.
* On the level of self, we feel embarrassed and threatened when our self-image is challenged. We fall into what David Burns calls “polarized thinking,” an all-or-nothing logic that assumes that we are totally competent or totally incompetent, totally good or totally bad, totally worthy or totally unworthy, without any middle ground.
* A human life is an ongoing process that involves a constantly changing physical body as well as an enormous number of rapidly changing thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. Your life therefore is an evolving experience, a continual flow. You are not a thing; that’s why any label is constricting [and] highly inaccurate ... Abstract labels such as “worthless” or “inferior” [or “worthy” or “superior”] communicate nothing and mean nothing. DAVID BURNS
* If you don’t want to dump the “poison” of your unspoken thoughts and emotions into your conversations and you don’t want to swallow it, what do you do? You can refine it. Just as refineries transform crude oil into fuel, we can transform our left-hand column to support task effectiveness, healthy relationships, and self-integrity.
* When you adopt the player stance, you no longer feel at the mercy of your automatic defensive routines.
* There are five mutual learning purposes in a difficult conversation: First, learning their story. Exploring other people’s perspective is always helpful. What information do they see that we missed or don’t have access to? What past experiences influence them? What is their reasoning for why they did what they did? What were their intentions? How did our actions impact them? What do they think we are contributing to the problem? What are they feeling? What does this situation mean to them? How does it affect their identity? What’s at stake? Second, expressing your views and feelings. Your goal should be to express your views and feelings with clarity, honesty, and respect.
* Third, addressing the situation together. Given what you and the other person have each learned, what would improve the situation going forward?
* The fourth step is to create a respectful context for the conversation. The right conversation within the wrong context is the wrong conversation. You can choose the perfect words, but they will likely fail if you say them with anger or they are received with distrust. Before you initiate a conversation, take some time to ground yourself in your values. Before getting into the content, spend some time creating a productive context of mutual respect with others.
* “While it is true that there’s no reason to enter a ... conversation if you don’t have Mutual Purpose, it’s equally true that you can’t stay in the conversation if you don’t maintain Mutual Respect ... As people perceive that others don’t respect them, the conversation immediately becomes unsafe and comes to a screeching halt. Why? Because respect is like air. If you take it away, it’s all people can think about. The instant people perceive disrespect in a conversation, the interaction is no longer about the original purpose—it is now about defending dignity.”
* The final preparatory step is to ensure that you have a proper setting for the conversation. Is the physical environment conducive?
* Does everyone have enough time to discuss the issue? Is everyone ready to have a frank discussion? Does everyone know the background of the conversation? Are there any significant issues (such as external distractions, potential interruptions, etc.) that need to be addressed before everyone can engage in the substance of the conversation?
* Here are some guidelines for productive expression: • Find common ground. Describe the problem in a way that feels true for both sides. Avoid judgments that can trigger the other’s defensiveness. Mediators call the story that honors both “my story” and “your story” “the third story.” This third story is usually presented as a difference between the parties. Say, for example, that I believe it is best to expand our retail chain nationally, while you believe that it is best to go international. I can begin by saying, “I want to talk about our expansion plans. My sense is that we see things differently. You believe it would be best to invest our capital in opening new stores in other countries, while I believe it would be best to open new stores within our country. I’d like to learn more about how you see things and explain to you how I am seeing them. Does this seem useful to you?”
* Provide facts. Remember that concrete examples and illustrations are the common ground on which to build with your partner. Communicate the observations (facts) that support your reasoning and the standards against which you compare them. Provide concrete examples and illustrations. Consider the difference between announcing, “Our help desk sucks!” and saying, “Last week, only sixty-five percent of the calls to our help desk were taken within five minutes.” (See Chapter 4 for an extended discussion on facts versus opinions.)
* Own your opinions. Your opinions are what you think, not the objective truth. They come from partial information; others may have different ideas that are equally valid.
* At the heart of better communication is the self-statement. A self-statement puts the responsibility for your emotional experience squarely on your shoulders. It is the one single, easy-to-learn skill that can most dramatically improve the communication.... Self-statements always begin by using the subject “I” to discuss a problem. They exist in opposition to their nemesis, “you” statements. A “you” statement puts the responsibility for your emotional discomfort on your partner, never on yourself. “You” statements are communications of criticism, blame, and anger.
* Recommend actions. Productive conversations thrive on specifics as opposed to generalities.
* Ensure comprehension. Many communication problems stem from the practical challenge of understanding each other, so ensure that people follow your reasoning. Give them a chance to clarify questions. Ask them, “Does this make sense?” or “Can I clarify anything further?” Invite responses to your expression.
* Accept challenges. When you encourage feedback, you will get challenges. Remember that alternative views do not weaken your argument; they reorient you from unilateral control toward mutual learning. Avoid the temptation to become defensive before you understand the other’s perspective.
* Humility does not mean giving up your point of view. Your purpose is to explore the situation together, not to abandon your perspective.
* While good inquiry is fundamentally an attitude, there are some practical guidelines for promoting it in the midst of a conversation. • Stay open. Full engagement involves your body, not just your mind. Hold a relaxed posture, do not cross your arms, maintain eye contact, and don’t forget to breathe. Body language is even more crucial when listening. If you are looking elsewhere (at a book, a computer screen, or a TV), it is nearly impossible to connect with the speaker. Keeping your body focused and open helps to establish rapport. • Be quiet. Do not interrupt or “finish” other people’s sentences. This demonstrates poor attention, impatience, and lack of respect.
* Summarize. After the person has finished, summarize what you heard in a way that encourages the other to take ownership of her opinions. I call this a “detox summary” since it can refine a toxic statement into a productive one. This summary shows that you have paid attention and that you want to understand the other person.
* Acknowledge and validate. Let the other person know that you find his feelings reasonable and that they matter to you.
* Don’t prosecute. Use inquiry to understand and learn, not to prove you are right and others are wrong. Ask open-ended questions that promote expression.
* Ask for permission to counter. Don’t begin counter-arguing without the speaker’s consent. You may be anxious to respond to the speaker, but restrain yourself.
* It is easy to understand why people assume that conflicts are inherently destructive; however, the energy of conflict is not inherently destructive. The negative consequences that we observe daily stem from our inability to manage conflicts constructively.
* Wherever there is life, there is conflict. Every life form, from the single-cell amoeba to the gigantic blue whale, experiences conflict. Conflict arises wherever there are needs and scarce resources to satisfy them. Plants compete for light and soil; animals compete for food and mates. Human needs extend far beyond food, shelter, and sex. We want power, attention, fame, love, and material wealth. We want a happy family, a big house, a good job, and a corner office. But there are only so many corner offices in any given building. So what do we do? We compete.
* Here are some typical approaches to conflict along with their inherent drawbacks. Denial. Some people find conflicts so threatening that they decide to deny their existence. They try to pretend the conflicts away.
* Avoidance. Some people are willing to see conflicts, but they do everything in their power to steer clear of them.
* Surrender. When some people discover that their desires conflict with those of others, they give up. This eliminates the overt confrontation, but it never works.
* Surrendering is like camping at the edge of the cliff. You keep meaning to cross the chasm, but instead you keep deciding to pack up and go home.
* Domination. Some people try to impose their desired solution at any cost. Initially, this strategy yields positive results on the task level, but it always causes major damage to relationships and it personally hurts those whose needs aren’t met. If people are unhappy and relationships suffer, external achievements will be short-lived. Furthermore, this approach often prevents the “winner” from exploring possibilities that could yield an even better result for him.
* Escalation. In this variation on domination, the person operates behind the scenes. He attempts to impose his will by lobbying an authority figure behind his counterpart’s back. This combines all the drawbacks of the domination strategy with a further aggravation: covert maneuvers encourage power games and destroy organizational integrity.
* Majority. This is another variance of domination, but instead of exercising direct authority, the dominator attempts to get his way by coaxing others to vote for what he wants.
* (It is crucial to distinguish a simple democracy, which equals pure majority rule, from a republic, which is based on constitutional guarantees—for example, the U.S. Bill of Rights—that protect each individual’s rights to life, liberty, and property.)
* Majority rule is four wolves and a sheep voting on what’s for dinner. ANONYMOUS
* Compromise. In a compromise, each person ends up with more than what she had, but less than what she wanted. Everybody loses a little.
* There are three factors necessary for a conflict. Disagreement. A disagreement is a difference of opinion.
* Scarcity. Some limitation prevents each party from obtaining what each wants independently of the other’s actions. Scarcity creates interdependence, which in turn creates conflict.
* Disputed Property Rights. The parties disagree about who has the power to allocate resources, or about what decision-making mechanism will be used in the case of irresolvable differences.
* The only way to solve a personal conflict is to “dissolve” it, demonstrating that there is no scarcity of “rightness” and “self-worth.” Your high self-esteem does not detract from mine, and vice versa. Each party is entitled to his opinion, and nobody has the right to claim ownership of the truth. Thus, we can agree to disagree and be at peace.
* The best way to address an operational conflict is through consensus. In order to work toward a consensus, each party must be granted veto power in the decision-making process at the outset; a decision is not reached until everybody—not a simple majority, or all but one person, but everybody—accepts it and commits to implement it.
* Consensus doesn’t mean that everyone believes that the decision is the best. Consensus means that everybody can live with the decision.
* Authority-based consensus—in which both of us agree that you have ultimate decision rights—is a delicate matter. Unless the senior person knows how to wield this power wisely, decisions will get made, but the process will not encourage collaboration and creativity.
* Individual Preparation. Before talking to your colleague, take some time to explore your position and clarify what your real needs and desires are. As you do this, reaffirm your commitment to consensus decision-making and mutual learning.
* Establish your Best Alternative To a Negotiated Agreement, your BATNA. Your BATNA is your worst-case scenario for a negotiation. It is the independent outcome you can guarantee for yourself if no interdependent solution works for all parties.
* If none of the solutions that are acceptable to the other party offers you a value above your BATNA, the best thing to do is to walk away from the deal.
* By discovering your BATNA, you clarify the lower boundary of your negotiation space. It gives you confidence because it lets you know what value you can guarantee for yourself even in the no-agreement scenario.
* A wise man lived poorly “You must not be so wise,” a neighbor challenged him. “If you bowed to the king, you wouldn’t need to live with so little.” “And if you lived with little,” the wise man responded, “You wouldn’t need to bow to the king.”
* Discovering how we can offer the other what she really wants without giving up what we really want is the basis for resolving operational conflict.
* To do this, it is necessary to distinguish between positions and interests. A position is an explicit demand that each speaker brings to the negotiation.
* position is an explicit demand that each speaker brings to the negotiation.
* An interest is the desire or need lying at the root of the position.
* What do we do then to achieve consensus?
* Find the underlying interests.
* Brainstorm. Once you discover the underlying interests, you try to develop new options. The key to brainstorming is that every proposal is valid. No criticizing, evaluating, or debating is allowed.
* Negotiate and Select. After creating a list of options, the parties can discuss the relative attractiveness of each.
* Outcome Consensus. After pursing the previous steps, many parties will find shared solutions.
* Process Consensus. If the previous step yields no material consensus, then the parties can implement an agreed-upon decision-making process.
* “Hierarchy,” and the unquestioning acceptance of it by everyone in the organization, is the only hope in a crisis
* Avoiding the End Run. Just as courts don’t accept testimonies from undisclosed accusers or evidence obtained without a warrant, managers shouldn’t accept unilateral attempts to escalate conflicts.
* “Upward delegation” is a scornful term they apply to any requests for help in mediating and arbitrating an issue that lower-level managers cannot resolve.
* Pursue BATNAs. If disagreements remain intractable, every person should pursue his or her BATNA independently.
* Evaluate and learn.
  * What can we learn from this conflict?
  * How could we minimize the chances of having a similar conflict again?
  * How did we behave during the negotiation?
  * What could we have done (and what could we do in the future) to improve?
  * How are our emotions? Is there something we need to clear?
  * How is our relationship? Is there something we need to clear?
* To tell whether constructive negotiations are working, look for these signs:
  * Flexibility. One of the most visible results of implementing constructive negotiation is more relaxed and fluid interaction.
  * New solutions. This method promotes digging beneath entrenched positions to discover deeper interests.
  * Competitive advantage. When people show respect for each other and produce better solutions, they also develop more confidence in their ability to work together. In a business world ruled by power struggles and dominating personalities, organizations capable of resolving conflicts constructively have a significant and sustainable source of competitive advantage.
* Working constructively in the midst of conflict requires perspective and discipline. My immediate impulse is often to advocate for my position and try to win by getting what I am asking for.
* A successful commitment maintains clarity among its participants about the most concrete of matters: who commits (is accountable) to deliver what by when (to whom).
* When this commitment is honored with impeccability, people feel secure, relationships of trust develop, and actions unfold in coordination. Impeccable commitments make life more productive and enjoyable. When commitments go awry, however, productivity plummets, trust turns into resentment, and people suffer.
* Every time we make a request, we expose ourselves. We acknowledge that we need someone’s help to achieve a desired result. In the same way that asking a question shows that I don’t know an answer, making a request implies that I cannot accomplish something alone. If I have a fragile ego, admitting that I’m lost might strike a blow to my self-esteem. I might decide, like the stereotypical male, to avoid this problem by never asking for directions.
* Many professionals derive their self-esteem from “making it alone” or “knowing it all”—or at least from looking like they can or do. That is why many refrain from asking for help, often at the expense of not getting the job done. A culture of “lone rangers”—where the most competent is the one who asks for the least help—wreaks havoc in organizations. People hide problems until it’s too late to solve them, and then try to affix the blame to external circumstances.
* Beyond exposing one’s need, asking someone to do something entails the risk of rejection. The person you are asking can say no. The possibility of being declined is too much for individuals who take things personally. They feel hurt and shamed when someone does not accept their requests. To avoid this frustration, they would rather not ask, even though not asking guarantees that they will not get what they want.
* Expression. A request must be expressed in a way that can be received and understood by the receiver.
* Requester. When the identity of the person who makes the request is uncertain, it is impossible for those receiving the request to know with whom they are dealing.
* Receiver. A request without an intended receiver is like an e-mail without an addressee.
* Standards. The goal of the requester is to obtain some service from the receiver by a specific time. To maintain clarity, these conditions for satisfaction—what, by when—must have defined observable standards.
* The main difference between an expression of desire and a request is the existence of measurable standards for assessment of fulfillment.
* Need. At the root of each request there is a need or desire that the requester is trying to satisfy.
* before you make a commitment, you take a breath and consider four questions. 1 Do I understand what the other is asking of me? 2 Do I have the skills and resources to do it? 3 Am I convinced that those on whom I depend will deliver for me? 4 Am I willing to be held accountable for anticipating potential breakdowns?
* An unproductive complaint seeks to soothe one’s hurt. Unproductive complaints look for sympathy and support from third parties; they are repetitive and conclude with negative personal judgments; they discharge emotions and seek revenge. Predictably, they do little to improve matters.
* The following steps provide an easy way to structure a productive complaint.
    * Check your intention. Review your purpose for complaining and ensure that it is virtuous. If you are looking to blame the other, you’re off track.
    * Establish the appropriate context. Remember that context is as important as content, so make sure you set an appropriate one (time, place, confidentiality, emotional tone, etc.). It’s useful to express your intentions openly to the recipient. You don’t want to fight; you want to improve your working relationship.
    * Verify the previous commitment. Many problems result from miscommunication of the original request and promise: you tried to request X, but the other heard (and promised)
    * At the end of a conversation, verbally summarize all the established agreements and verify that the other party concurs. Then, e-mail him the summary and ask him to correct any mistakes you might have made
    * Verify the failure to honor the commitment. Both parties need to agree that the promisor did not keep his promise. This is necessary, as the other party might argue that he did fulfill it. It’s also possible that the commitment has been honored and you just don’t know
    * Inquire into what happened. Both parties now agree that there was a problem with the commitment, but you still don’t know why the promisor didn’t keep his promise. By inquiring, you hear the other’s story of what happened from his point of view.
    * Evaluate the damage and express the complaint. A broken commitment creates difficulties on three levels: operational, relational, and personal. The task suffers from a lack of coordination, the relationship suffers from a loss of trust, and the individual suffers from the stress and grief of having been let down.
    * A person who breaks a commitment jeopardizes the task, the relationship, and his honor.
    * Request reparations and negotiate a recommitment. Every productive complaint will include your request for reparations. This can be as simple as asking the receiver to recommit to keeping his original promise, or it can include additional compensation.
* A danger here is that in seeking to be “nice,” you might ask for something that doesn’t really close the issue for you. Often, this misguided kindness generates resentment in the long term.
* Learn and prepare for the future. The last step in this process is to look for opportunities to improve. A broken commitment represents the proverbial “defect” the Japanese regard as a “treasure” for learning.
* for forgiveness. Expressing regret is a crucial step, but it is only the beginning. It is also essential to accept accountability and do what’s necessary to recover impeccability: address the incomplete task, restore trust to the relationship, and help minimize the damage caused to
* The following seven steps outline a structure for apologizing productively.
     * Establish the appropriate purpose (individual context) for the apology. The goal is to repair the breakdowns in coordination, trust, and impeccability, and the hurt feelings.
     * Establish the appropriate context (prepare the conversation). Choose an appropriate time and place and express to your counterpart your desire to repair the breakdown.
     * Acknowledge the previous commitment. Own your promise.
     * Acknowledge your failure to honor the commitment. Take responsibility for the non-fulfillment. Offer an explanation. Explain what happened. Distinguishing this explanation from an excuse that invalidates the commitment is paramount. You aren’t trying to justify yourself or evade your responsibility; instead, you’re trying to share your experience and situation as part of the problem’s context.
     * Inquire about the damages and apologize. Before offering to repair any damages, you must first know what they are. By inquiring into them, you more clearly understand the ramifications of the problem; this also helps the other to express his pain. Your goal isn’t to argue but to listen to and acknowledge the other’s perspective.
     * Offer reparations and negotiate a recommitment. Although you can offer reparations, it’s important that you ask the other what he needs to feel appropriately indemnified and allow him to declare the issue resolved.
     * Learn and prepare for the future. As with a complaint, the last step of the apology is transforming the mistake into an opportunity to learn.
* A leader who does not confront broken commitments encourages polite complacency.
* For most companies, recognition equals material reward, so they provide incentives through compensation.
* Indirect. Effective recognition is direct. Rather than speaking about others in the third person (as if they weren’t present), recognize them in second person. When you communicate in the third person, you address everybody except the acknowledged. Your recognition will reach far deeper if you address the other directly.
* Abstract. Effective recognition is specific. Rather than using generalities, identify the specific consequences of the other’s tangible actions.
* Imposing. Effective recognition is respectful. Rather than telling the person who she is, let her know how her actions affected you positively.
* You can use your breath as a circuit breaker. You can relieve stress and stop anxiety with a deep breath. Breathing consciously simply entails paying attention and using your will to bring air to your belly. Concentrating on the breathing process immediately brings your attention to the here and now and soothes your mind. This is a simple yet very effective way to control stress.
* There are five basic competencies for working with your emotions: self-awareness, self-acceptance, self-regulation, self-inquiry, and self-expression.
   * Self-awareness: Self-awareness is the capacity to know what is happening within yourself. The capacity to feel one’s inner state is a basic survival skill of every organism, but human beings can develop it to a very high level. You not only experience your inner states; you can reflect
   * Self-acceptance: The second step to managing your emotions is to accept them without judgment.
   * Self-regulation: The third step in working with your emotions is regulating your impulses. You need to maintain awareness in the face of instinctual pressures.
   * Self-inquiry: In order to master emotions, you need to find their root stories. You need to analyze your thoughts in order to separate useful information from neurosis.
* This being human is a guest house. Every morning a new arrival. A joy, a depression, a meanness, some momentary awareness comes as an unexpected visitor. Welcome and entertain them all! Even if they’re a crowd of sorrows, who violently sweep your house empty of its furniture, still, treat each guest honorably. He may be clearing you out for some new delight. The dark thought, the shame, the malice, meet them at the door laughing, and invite them in. Be grateful for whoever comes, because each has been sent as a guide from beyond. RUMI, “THE GUEST HOUSE”
* To work with others’ emotions, it is necessary to accept them without judgment. It’s not only useless to chastise somebody for what he or she feels, it’s also counterproductive. You might feel the urge to tell a troubled coworker to cheer up, or tell your child that things are not really so bad, but such admonitions never work. The receiver not only continues to feel troubled, but now he feels alienated as well.
* Remember that people who criticize you are speaking their truth. According to their experiences and their interpretations, they are perfectly right in feeling what they feel.
* The market system brings prosperity to those who satisfy the desires of others in the best and least expensive way. Wealth can only be attained by serving the consumer. LUDWIG VON MISES
* “Work is love made visible,” said Kahlil Gibran. Service, rather than greed, is what drives a market economy. Business is a crucial arena for the expression of the human spirit. But love, service, and spirituality are not terms usually associated with the marketplace. Many of us believe that it is necessary to sell out in order to succeed in business, or to drop out in order to pursue a spiritual life. This is a false polarity. When business is conducted with a high level of consciousness, there is no tension between material and spiritual wealth. Conscious leadership can create a conscious business, one that integrates wisdom and compassion in support of human development. In a conscious business, ancient wisdom and modern economics come together.
* One of the best-known maps of the spiritual path is a series of carvings called the Ten Ox-Herding Pictures. It comes from the Zen teachings of twelfth century China. These images depict the journey of a shepherd and his ox. At the beginning, the wild ox is lost; it doesn’t even appear in the first picture. We only see the shepherd looking for it. As the journey progresses, the shepherd finds the ox, tames it, rides it home, and eventually becomes one with it. In the ninth picture, both the ox and the shepherd disappear, but in the tenth and final image the shepherd, transformed into a Buddha, shows up smiling. The last carving represents the shepherd’s final awakening. Surprising those who think that business and spirituality don’t mix, it is called “Entering the Marketplace with Helping Hands.” The shepherd represents the seeker; the ox, the seeker’s mind. The journey begins when the human being realizes that his mind is out of control, that it has gone wild and trapped him in a world of illusion. He becomes conscious of his unconsciousness. Realizing the problem, he begins his search for truth. Near the end of his journey, in the ninth picture, the seeker reaches Enlightenment. He realizes the infinite spaciousness in which both he and his mind arise. He recognizes the empty nature of phenomena (from the Greek, “appearances”) and actualizes the no-thing-ness of his true nature. Thus, he “disappears.”
* In the tenth picture, “Entering the Marketplace with Helping Hands,” the shepherd, finally awakened to the Truth of Being, appears as “a jolly rustic that wanders from village to village, from mundane situation to mundane situation. His body is overflowing with life-energy. His being is full of compassionate love. His open hands express perfect emptiness.”89 A perfect emptiness that is ready to manifest as creative and helpful work.
* The word “spirit” derives from the same root as breath, and it was once used to mean the principle animating a living organism. Over time, the focus shifted from life to consciousness as the central concept of spirituality.
* it is impossible to suffer a loss when you love your opponent.
* Every one of us starts at the egocentric stage, where the only thing that matters is “me” and whatever makes “me” happy.
* As the individual matures, he becomes ethnocentric. At this stage, he sees himself as a member of a community, one of “us.” Instead of focusing on himself and what he wants, the individual begins to care for his fellow community members.
* For those who grow into it, the next stage is the world-centric. (Researchers assess that less than 15 percent of today’s adult human population operates at this stage or above.) Here, the individual lives according to universal values; it is not about “us” anymore, but about “all of us.” His circle of care and concern becomes impersonal and encompasses all humanity.
* At the highest level is the spirit-centric stage. Spirit-centric development is quite rare; research suggests that less that half a percent of the world’s population operates from this level of consciousness.92 The spirit-centric individual extends his circle of care and concern to encompass each and every sentient being. At this level the individual experiences a sense of connection with others that transcends the appearance of separation. Objects and people in the world continue to appear separate, just as they did at the previous levels, but the individual now experiences a deeper truth.
* I have been thinking of the difference between water and the waves on it. Rising, water is still water, falling back, it is water, will you give me a hint how to tell them apart? Because someone has made up the word “wave,” do I have to distinguish it from water? KABIR
* when you feel empty it is tempting to try to fill yourself up with accomplishments. Competition becomes a materialistic ego-boosting pursuit. When you feel full, there is no need to find your worth in external success. Competition becomes a spiritual practice, an opportunity to test your mettle and express your values.
* A human being is a part of the whole called by us “the universe,” a part limited in time and space. He experiences himself, his thoughts and feelings, as something separate from the rest—a kind of optical delusion of his consciousness. This delusion is a kind of prison for us, restricting us to our personal desires and affection for a few persons nearest to us. Our task is to free ourselves from this prison by widening our circle of understanding and compassion to embrace all living creatures and the whole of nature in its beauty. ALBERT EINSTEIN
* Self-actualizing work transcends the ego, freeing people from an exclusive preoccupation with themselves.
* What kind of work supports self-actualization? Any work, really. What matters is the attitude that accompanies it. Self-actualization is best supported through expressions of responsibility, autonomy, and essential integrity: a commitment to a meaningful purpose that goes beyond the immediate gratification of selfish desires and embraces others in service. This attitude not only maximizes the chances of success; it guarantees “success beyond success.”
* The only way to achieve happiness is not to pursue it directly. Happiness arises as a consequence of pursuing integrity and meaning, not happiness.
* The same happens with profits. The worst way to be profitable is to focus on profits. Profits are a consequence of customer care, employee engagement, enlightened leadership, and service orientation: of successful business strategies and efficient business processes running on capable business infrastructures. The most powerful of these infrastructures is a healthy organizational culture—a culture based on integrity, meaning, wisdom, and love. Such a culture not only produces extraordinary long-term business results, but extraordinary happiness and fulfillment as well.
* This is how a human being can change: span there’s a worm addicted to eating grape leaves. Suddenly, he wakes up, Call it grace, whatever, something wakes him, and he’s no longer a worm. He’s the entire vineyard, and the orchard too, the fruit, the trunks, a growing wisdom and joy that doesn’t need to devour. RUMI, “THE WORM’S WALKING”
* Friend, hope for the truth while you are alive. Jump into experience while you are still alive... What you call “salvation” belongs to the time before death. If you don’t break your ropes while you are alive, do you think ghosts will do it after? The idea that the soul will join with the ecstatic just because the body is rotten— that is all fantasy. What is found now is found then. If you find nothing now, you will simply end up with an empty apartment in the City of Death. If you fall in love with the divine now, in the next life you will have the face of satisfied desire. KABIR
* The game has clear boundaries. Inside, there are risk, challenge, and drama; outside, security, ease, and calm. When playing a game we can feel the “danger” of losing, while knowing that we are totally “safe.” In the game, we face obstacles that test our mettle and push us to perform at our best. We are at the edge. If we slip, we lose. The relaxation comes from knowing that the loss is relatively inconsequential. Inside the game, it’s the end. Outside, life goes on.
* Two attitudes can ruin the fun: taking the game too seriously and not taking it seriously enough. In the first case, we forget that the risk of the game exists in a larger context of safety. We all know people who take things too seriously, lose their sense of perspective, and play to kill rather than to have a good time while they play to win. In the second case, we never get into the action. I wouldn’t want someone on my team who kept saying; “This is just a game, it doesn’t really matter, there’s no point in playing hard, winning or losing doesn’t make any difference.”
* “Before enlightenment, chop wood and carry water. After enlightenment, chop wood and carry water.”
* We shall not cease from exploration And the end of all our exploring Will be to arrive where we started And know the place for the first time. T.S. ELIOT, FROM “LITTLE GIDDING”
