# I Will Never See the World Again

* Author: Ahmet Altan
* Translator: Yasemin Congar
* GoodReads: [I Will Never See the World Again: The Memoir of an Imprisoned Writer](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/44459518-i-will-never-see-the-world-again)

## Highlights

* On one side of this reality was a body made of flesh, bone, blood, muscle and nerve that was trapped. On the other side was a mind that did not care about that body and made fun of what would happen to it, a mind that looked from above at what was happening and at what was yet to happen, that believed itself untouchable and that was, therefore, untouchable.
* I realized once more that when you are faced with a reality that can turn your life upside down, that same sorry reality will sweep you away like a wild flood only if you submit to it and act as it expects you to.
* As someone who has been thrown into the dirty, swelling waves of reality, I can say with certainty that its victims are those so-called smart people who believe that you have to act in accordance with it.
* The trick is to do the unexpected, to say the unexpected. Once you can make light of the lance of destiny pointing at your body, you can cheerfully eat the cherries you had filled your hat with, like the unforgettable lieutenant in Pushkin’s story “The Shot” who does exactly that with a gun pointing at his heart.
* Like Borges, you can answer the mugger who demands, “Your money or your life,” with, “My life.” The power you will gain is limitless.
* someone whom I reckon to be made from the illuminated shadows of those magnificent dead reflected in me spoke, and thus managed to change all that was happening. Reality could not conquer me. Instead, I conquered reality.
* Instinctively, I was trying to hold on to the idea of death. The eternity of death has the power to trivialize even the most terrifying moments of life. Thinking that I would die had a calming effect on me. A person who is going to die does not need to fear the things that life presents.
* During a scorching heatwave, when crops catch fire, a circle is drawn around the blaze and the grain along that circle is deliberately set alight before the flames can reach it. Once the fire arrives at the circle it stops, as there is nothing left there to burn. They use fire to put out fire. I had surrounded and extinguished the fire of terror, which life had lit in a cage, with the fire of death.
* “Tell me,” I said, “what is the bigger sin – a man eating an apple or punishing all of humanity with torture because a man ate an apple?”
* I added furiously, “Your God is a sinner.”
* “Is an apple worth all of this?” I wondered.
* The mirror shows you to you, it confirms your being. The distance between you and the mirror creates a field that belongs only to you, a field that surrounds you, is yours, somewhere no one else can trespass. Without a mirror, that field also disappears.
* I remembered words from Elias Canetti: When you touch time with the tips of your fingers, it laughs all at once and scatters like dust.
* We couldn’t tell in which direction time flowed. Sometimes it flowed toward the past, toward our memories. Sometimes it flowed toward the future and our worries. But more often it stagnated in this strange-smelling gloom.
* Anyone on earth who finds a listener has a story to tell. What is difficult to find is not the story, but the listener. I was the listener in that cage.
* A prisoner counts everything. Except time. A prisoner discovers time.
* I used to believe that I would die and life would go on, but life had died and I was left behind.
* Like a Bedouin in an endless desert who knows where to find an oasis with plenty of water, I walked confidently toward my inner spring of imagination, the location of which I knew by heart.
* There was no clock making time faster by dividing it into seconds, minutes and hours. There was no movement, no thought, no image dividing time into pieces. Time had become a single entity: a gargantuan reptile. When one can’t separate the moments, they stick together and become swollen.
* Now I understood why human beings invented the clock, why they put clocks on the streets, the squares, the towers. They did this not in order to know the time; they did it so that they could divide and escape from it.
* Forgetting is the greatest source of freedom a person can have. The prison, the cell, the walls, the doors, the locks, the problems and the people – everything and everyone placing limits on my life and telling me “you cannot go beyond” is erased and gone.
* In prison, the lack of resources improves one’s creativity. One makes curtains out of bin bags, hanging hooks from teaspoons, dumb-bells from five-liter water bottles, flutes from cardboard, cushions from kitchen sponges, pillow covers from T-shirts.
* What does a madman see in his dreams? While sane people go mad in their dreams by experiencing things that have broken free of reason, do the insane come to their senses at night thanks to rational dreams?
* God is a magnificent metaphor.
* First they find a God who tells them to be good and then they kill one another in his name. It sends chills up my spine. What’s more, they believe that this very God owns a torture facility called hell. I suspect that hell takes up more space than heaven in the believers’ souls.
* Because religion finds the solution to all problems in the afterlife, seeing things through the prism of faith inevitably invokes an image of death. When my cellmates look through that prism, they see the afterlife, but I only see death.
* Abu Talib was the uncle of Prophet Muhammad. He never became a Muslim himself but helped Muslims a great deal. The first Muslims liked him very much and prayed that he too would accept their faith and go to heaven. When Abu Talib became ill and took to his bed, they visited and told him this: “You will die soon. Accept Islam and be saved in the afterlife.” “No,” said the prophet’s uncle, “I won’t do anything that will make people say I became a Muslim because I feared death.”
* One evening we were talking about religion again when I told him about Spinoza and then asked: “Does God have any boundaries?” “May God forgive me,” he said, “of course he doesn’t.” “Then God embodies everything on earth.” “Of course!” “Then God’s existence doesn’t end where my body begins. He embodies me also. Me, you, all of us…we are a part of God. Then there is nothing I can call ‘I.’ Because if I exist separately, there is no God, and if there is God then there isn’t a separate me.”
* The gap between the moment a person’s destiny changed and the moment the person realized this seemed to him to be the most tragic and frightening aspect of life. The future became clear, but the person continued to wait for another future with other expectations and dreams without realizing that the future had already been determined. The ignorance during that wait was horrible and to him was humanity’s greatest weakness.
* I could see that my life was about to go down like an old ship in a heavy storm – the cracked boards, creaking hinges, torn sail and wobbling mast all coming to pieces in the waves, to be buried in the watery depths. I watched my life in the dark. The red glow of my cigarette pulsed like a lighthouse. I thought: “What will I do? What am I supposed to do?” I could have cursed the storm and got angry with those who had created it. I could have felt depressed about having fallen right into the eye of the storm. I could have complained about my fate. None of that would calm the storm. Indeed, I wasn’t supposed to be thinking about the storm. Like Odysseus facing Poseidon’s fury, I had to use all my strength to survive, and for that I had to focus not on the storm but on what was within my capacity. I had to write my own Odyssey in this dark cell. To save oneself from the monstrous waves, the sirens and the man-eating Cyclopses, one must resist and fight. There was the storm and there was me. We were going to fight.
* ideas should not give birth to the novel, but that the novel should give birth to ideas.
* when I look at Balzac, Tolstoy and Dostoyevsky I cannot help but think that if they had written their novels using only their ideas and not their intuition no one would remember them today.
* News from the outside reaches you only after it has undergone several transformations and traveled through the narrowest of channels, like the tapered glass piping in a chemistry lab.
* some people were noble and some were ignoble. There might be ignoble ones among the prisoners and there might be noble ones among the guards.
* Suddenly, I realized that what I had been feeling was all wrong. I should have been angry, furious or even sad. Instead, I had forgotten about those feelings and, like a botanist coming across a new species of plant, had busied myself examining those whose behavior went against their religious beliefs and professional ethics.
