# democracy and western media

*This was a response to a thread where I responded to a European friend claiming how Europe has a lot of freedoms and how bad Turkey is for jailing journalists*

West is where Neo nazis can march, sometimes set mosques, homes, refugee camps on fire and that's exactly the freedom west has been so proud of. The measurement of western democracy is not the freedom of minorities being oppressed, such as muslims. Just recently Germany shut down a Muslim media group for radicalizing people, raiding their homes, offices. Turkish people in Germany and Netherlands were not let to gather for election meetings, Dutch newspapers' response to the cops beating up Turkish citizens peacefully gathered on the street was to fill their papers with big puntos telling Turkish immigrants to go back to Turkey. Tolerance and democracy is not measured with how you tolerate the fascists in your country. Tolerance and democracy are measured by how you treat minorities, immigrants.

I got friends and relatives in prison currently. I fought the police on the street taking risks when Time magazine was choosing Erdoğan as their cover in the times they shared power. That time there was a lot of journalists in jail, for example, making a research about Gülen. Where was the western media ? Where was all these demonizations, all these innocent journalists ? Some shit happened and Erdoğan gave middle finger to his ex partners, suddenly we began seeing demonizations of him. Same thing currently happens in Philippines, Europe's 50 year tax-free mining contracts are about to end, somehow CIA moves its cartels from Mexico to Philippines to destabilize the country until it gives up again, and the opponent China gets a gangster elected to fight back. On one side, there is a western colonization gang with all innocent hero journalists racing for demonizing the opponent, on the other side, there is a simple gangster hired by chinese business man trying to secure their investments. The world is done with the colonizers ripping countries off in return to exporting democracy. No surprise why Europe is declining power.

With all my respect to who actually do research and take risks, I find many journalists thrash. Like this Gülenist worked for a ideological group who arrested anyone critising their operation, and they published a ideological magazine which manipulates the public with fake documents and planted evidences on cases like bombings, shootings, and once they lost all that power, they become democrat journalists! Yeah but, they have never done any journalism before ?

I recently met a black journalist from NY who worked for liberal media, and she worked on a case about how NYC cops arrest muslim cab drivers to help the prison companies make more profit. She collected true evidences such as phone records, but couldn't publish it anywhere! Then left US, kept doing journalism this time in Asia, about the western minings. People tried to kil her :) She show me the website she reported to, I guess indie site with no marketing and no finance behind, would never make it to even first 10 pages of any Google search. They are the real journalists who do research and don't care about what their boss wanna see and what people wanna read.

What we see in the western media is all western propaganda. Yeah, you can say Fuck Trump and draw Merkel kissing Obama but when it comes to a topic that matters such as democracy in middle east, all the ideas you'd hear there would be already out of date, some ancient democracy noone in middle east believes anymore. Western media loves to see underaged kids holding AK47 for democracy or christianity but if it's muslims fighting, they demonize the hell out of them. A Vice journalist made a documentary about underaged Kurdish youth arming up to start a civil war for independence. In middle east and Africa, western media, governments and intelligence agencies never missed any opportunity to create little adhoc nations from beautiful democracy dreams and they even forgot the war they supplied weapons to after a year. Like Syria! The western media demonized Assad, reported some Syrian youth asking for democracy, innocent people were being killed or put in jails by demon dictator, so there has to be a french revolution in Syria then, right ?

The truth is, a lot of people including myself, would prefer a middle eastern king or dictator whatever, over any sort of system brought from Europe. Specifically democracy because for west, democracy is a weapon that they own. A military coup (funded by US) happens in Honduras, Clinton calls it restoring democracy. A military coup happens in Egypt, Obama calls it restoring democracy. A military coup is happening in Turkey, all western media backs it calling "Turkish military is restoring secular democracy" until it fails, then after the failure, they began calling the coup was fake and innocent people are being arrested. The most funny part of that is, if the coup actually worked out, military would execute actual journalists in the name of democracy, and western media wouldn't even mention it. Western hypocracy is quite often heard for a reason.
