# Survival

The second highest mountain in Africa is called Toubkal, and is in Morocco. We went there last month and hiked to the summit in a bad stormy weather. It was my first time to see such a powerful wind that suddenly hits you and you find your body on the ground. As you get close, your foot gets quite close to the cliff sometimes, and all you can do is just wishing it's a lucky day.

We met two Moroccan students on the way because we were the only 4 humans left in the whole mountain, and the nature never jokes when it catches you weak, it can beat you up to the death. We all felt getting close to the death and this made us be friends instantly. We literally walked holding eachothers hands, motivating eachother like we're wrestlers. One of the Moroccan guys were having issues with his health because of smoking, so stopped in the middle. Rest of us made to the peak, and didn't mind to eat the canned food left by someone else. Who cares about hygene when your body needs to fight for survival.

We made it back to the basecamp, and the storm was still going there, our tent was already taken out by the wind, fortunately it didn't fly away. There were more young Moroccan people preparing to make it to the summit next day in the base camp, we started trying to make fire together but it was so hard under the storm. If you go there, you'll see the whole basecamp is surrounded by walls and you have to pay if you wanna put your tent inside. And there was a hotel inside the wall, full of white europeans in vacation. They built the walls surrounding all the dry area, so for people who doesn't want to pay, there was just wet ground left for camping, and not much luck for hiding from the wind. We desperately tried to make campfire, tried to fix our tent but finding a not wet ground with an angle protecting us from wind was so hard, and our tent was not strong enough to resist the wind. So we started hiking back to the nearest town same day with our backpacks weighing about 15kg.

After hours of walking and camping on the way, we made it to the nearest town next morning. I remember looking at the town from distance and loving its colorful houses built so similar and closely to eachother. In Asia, middle east and Africa, houses are built closely to eachother and all houses are about same size. One day after surviving, I remembered that our ancestors settled down for a reason; surviving. There was no other chance. They would not be able to make even a fire otherwise. And they were financially equal because they built these towns in solidarity to survive. We can see how the law of the nature works in clearly in this example; humans can't survive without being a community who live in solidarity.
