# Therapy

* We know that we would not last long in society if a stream of our uncensored inner data ever leaked out of our minds.
* It’s immensely hard for us to think deeply and coherently for any length of time. We keep losing the thread. Competing, irrelevant ideas have a habit of flitting across the mental horizon and scrambling our tentative insights.
* Every now and then, consciousness goes entirely blank.
* From the start, the therapist will use a succession of very quiet but significant prompts to help us develop and stick at the points we are circling. These suggest that there is no hurry but that someone is there, following every utterance and willing us on. At strategic points, the therapist will drop in a mission-critical and hugely benign “do say more” or an equally powerful “go on.”
* Therapists are expert at the low-key positive sound: the benevolent, nuanced “ahh” and the potent “mmm,” two of the most significant noises in the aural repertoire of psychotherapy that together invite us to remain faithful to what we were starting to say, however peculiar or useless it might at first have seemed.
* The active listener contains and nurtures the emerging confusion. They gently take us back over ground we’ve covered too fast and prompt us to address a salient point we might have sidestepped; they will help us chip away at an agitating issue while continually reassuring us that what we are saying is valuable.
* They’re not treating us like strangely ineffective communicators; they’re just immensely alive to how difficult it is for anyone to piece together what they really have on their minds.
* Therapy is built on the understanding that we will not be able to transmit our key experiences in one or two self-contained blocks. We live in time and have to decode ourselves at different periods. Things emerge, sometimes very slowly, over months.
* After therapy, people will continue to misunderstand us; we’ll meet with opposition; there will be things it would be nice to have that will be out of reach; success will come to people who don’t appear to deserve it, and much that’s good about us won’t be fully appreciated by others. We’ll still have to compete and submit to the judgment of others; we’ll still be lonely sometimes; and therapy won’t stop us having to watch the people we love pass away, and falling ill and eventually dying ourselves. Therapy can’t make life better than it truly is.
